context-utils-documentation.md, before:

# Context Utils Plugin - Architecture Documentation

> Internal documentation for LLM reference. Describes plugin architecture, file structure, and key patterns.

## Overview

Joplin plugin that adds context-aware menu options when right-clicking on links, images, and code in the markdown editor. Uses CodeMirror 6 syntax tree for robust detection.

**Supported Contexts:**

- External URLs (`https://...`)
- Joplin resources (`:/32-hex-id`)
- Email addresses (`mailto:...`)
- Markdown links (`[text](url)`)
- Reference-style links (`[text][ref]` with `[ref]: url`)
- Markdown images (`![alt](url)`)
- HTML images (`<img src="...">`)
- Inline code (`` `code` ``)
- Code blocks (` ` ```)
- **Task list checkboxes** (`- [ ]` / `- [x]`)
- **Task selections** (multiple selected checkboxes)
- **Footnotes** (`[^1]` reference)

## Architecture

### Core Components

```
┌─────────────────┐
│   index.ts      │  Plugin entry point
│                 │  - Registers settings
│                 │  - Registers content script
│                 │  - Registers commands
│                 │  - Registers context menu filter
└────────┬────────┘
         │
    ┌────┴────┬──────────┬──────────┬──────────┐
    │         │          │          │          │
    v         v          v          v          v
┌────────┐ ┌───────┐ ┌────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌──────────┐
│settings│ │menus  │ │commands│ │  types  │ │ content  │
│  .ts   │ │  .ts  │ │  .ts   │ │   .ts   │ │ scripts/ │
└────────┘ └───────┘ └────────┘ └─────────┘ └──────────┘
```

### Data Flow ("Pull" Architecture)

1. **Content Script** (contentScript.ts):
    - Registers command `contextUtils-getContextAtCursor` using `codeMirrorWrapper.registerCommand()`
    - Command executes on-demand when called by main plugin
    - Delegates detection to `contextDetection.ts`
    - Returns **array of contexts** (supports multiple simultaneous contexts)

2. **Main Plugin** (menus.ts):
    - When context menu opens, calls `joplin.commands.execute('editor.execCommand', { name: 'contextUtils-getContextAtCursor' })`
    - Awaits contexts directly from editor (guaranteed to match cursor position)
    - Iterates through returned contexts array
    - Builds context menu dynamically with items for all detected contexts

3. **Commands** (commands.ts):
    - Execute actions when menu items are clicked
    - Use Joplin API for clipboard, file operations, URL opening

**Key Benefits of Pull Architecture:**

- ✅ Zero race conditions (context always matches cursor position)
- ✅ Zero overhead (detection only runs on right-click, not every cursor movement)
- ✅ Simpler code (no message passing, no global state)
- ✅ Multi-context support (can show multiple relevant options simultaneously)

## File Structure

### Core Files

**src/index.ts**

- Plugin registration and initialization
- Coordinates all subsystems
- Initialization order matters (settings → settings cache → content script → commands → menu)

**src/types.ts**

- Type definitions with discriminated unions
- `EditorContext = LinkContext | CodeContext | CheckboxContext | TaskSelectionContext | FootnoteContext`
- `LinkType` enum (ExternalUrl, JoplinResource, Email)
- `TaskInfo` interface for individual tasks in selections
- Command IDs (including checkbox and footnote commands)
- `EditorRange` for text replacement operations

**src/settings.ts**

- Settings registration using Joplin Settings API
- Centralized `SETTINGS_CONFIG` object defines all settings with metadata (key, defaultValue, label, description)
- 10 boolean settings (all default `true`):
    - `showToastMessages` - Show toast notifications
    - `showOpenLink` - Show "Open Link" in context menu
    - `showCopyPath` - Show "Copy Path" in context menu
    - `showRevealFile` - Show "Reveal File" in context menu
    - `showCopyCode` - Show "Copy Code" in context menu
    - `showCopyOcrText` - Show "Copy OCR Text" in context menu
    - `showToggleTask` - Show task toggle options in context menu
    - `showGoToFootnote` - Show "Go to footnote" in context menu
    - `showPinToTabs` - Show "Open Note as Pinned Tab" in context menu (requires Note Tabs plugin)
    - `showOpenNoteNewWindow` - Show "Open Note in New Window" in context menu
- Settings accessed via `settingsCache` object (e.g., `settingsCache.showToastMessages`)

**src/menus.ts**

- Context menu filter (`joplin.workspace.filterEditorContextMenu`)
- Pulls contexts on-demand from content script via `editor.execCommand` (returns array)
- Supports multiple contexts at same position (e.g., code + checkbox)
- Distinguishes between note links and resource links using `isJoplinNote()` helper
- Resource-specific options (Copy Path, Reveal File) only shown for actual resources
- Checks settings before adding menu items
- Only adds separator if ≥1 menu item will be shown

**src/commands.ts**

- Command handlers for:
    - Open Link (external URLs → browser, resources → default app)
    - Copy Path (URLs → clipboard, resources → file path)
    - Reveal File (resources only → file explorer)
    - Copy Code (code blocks → clipboard)
    - Copy OCR Text (image resources → clipboard)
    - **Toggle Checkbox** (single checkbox `[ ]` ↔ `[x]`)
    - **Check All Tasks** (bulk check unchecked tasks in selection)
    - **Uncheck All Tasks** (bulk uncheck checked tasks in selection)
    - **Go to Footnote** (scrolls to footnote definition)
    - **Open Note as Pinned Tab** (opens note as pinned tab via Note Tabs plugin)
    - **Open Note in New Window** (opens note in a new Joplin window)
- All commands show toast notifications (if enabled)

**src/contentScripts/contentScript.ts**

- CodeMirror 6 content script entry point (type: CodeMirrorPlugin)
- Registers commands:
    - `contextUtils-getContextAtCursor` - delegates to `contextDetection.ts`
    - `contextUtils-replaceRange` - text replacement for checkbox toggling
    - `contextUtils-batchReplace` - atomic batch replacement for bulk operations
    - `contextUtils-scrollToPosition` - scrolls editor to specific position (for footnotes)

**src/contentScripts/contextDetection.ts**

- Multi-context detection logic (returns array of contexts)
- Delegates parsing to `parsingUtils.ts`
- Detection priority: Code > Links > Images > Footnotes (checkboxes run alongside as secondary context)
- Uses text scanning for footnotes (syntax tree doesn't detect them)

**src/contentScripts/parsingUtils.ts**

- Pure utility functions for parsing:
    - `extractUrl` (syntax tree traversal)
    - `extractReferenceLabel` (syntax tree traversal for reference links)
    - `findReferenceDefinition` (finds URL for reference label, case-insensitive, first occurrence wins)
    - `parseImageTag` (regex)
    - `classifyUrl` (regex)
    - `parseInlineCode` (regex)
    - `parseCodeBlock` (syntax tree + regex fallback)
    - `findFootnoteDefinition` (line scan)

### Utilities

**src/logger.ts**

- Centralized logging with log levels (DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR)
- Exposes runtime controls via `console.contextUtils.setLogLevel()`
- Default level: WARN

**src/utils/toastUtils.ts**

- Toast notification wrapper
- Checks `settingsCache.showToastMessages` before showing
- Graceful error handling

## Key Patterns

### 1. Discriminated Unions

```typescript
type EditorContext = LinkContext | CodeContext | CheckboxContext | TaskSelectionContext | FootnoteContext;

interface LinkContext {
    contextType: 'link'; // Discriminator
    url: string;
    type: LinkType;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface CodeContext {
    contextType: 'code'; // Discriminator
    code: string;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface CheckboxContext {
    contextType: 'checkbox'; // Discriminator
    checked: boolean;
    lineText: string;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface TaskSelectionContext {
    contextType: 'taskSelection'; // Discriminator
    tasks: TaskInfo[];
    checkedCount: number;
    uncheckedCount: number;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface FootnoteContext {
    contextType: 'footnote'; // Discriminator
    label: string;
    targetPos: number;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}
```

TypeScript uses `contextType` to narrow types safely.

### 2. Hybrid Detection Approach

The plugin uses **syntax tree traversal for links** (robust) and a **hybrid approach for code** (practical).

**For Links - Syntax Tree (Robust):**

Bad (regex, fragile):

```typescript
const match = linkText.match(/\[([^\]]+)\]\(([^)]+)\)/);
// Breaks on nested parentheses: [text](https://example.com/foo(bar))
```

Good (syntax tree, robust):

```typescript
function extractUrlFromLinkNode(node: SyntaxNode, view: EditorView): string | null {
    const cursor = node.cursor();
    if (!cursor.firstChild()) return null;

    do {
        if (cursor.name === 'URL') {
            return view.state.doc.sliceString(cursor.from, cursor.to);
        }
    } while (cursor.nextSibling());

    return null;
}
```

**For Code - Hybrid Approach:**

- **Inline code**: Regex (because `InlineCode` nodes include backticks)
- **Fenced code blocks**: Syntax tree to extract `CodeText` children, with regex fallback
- **Indented code blocks**: Syntax tree to collect multiple `CodeText` children (one per line)

### 3. Checkbox Detection and Toggling

**Detection Strategy:**

1. **Selection check** - If there's a text selection, check for tasks first (returns single `TaskSelectionContext`)
2. **Primary context** - Detect code/links/images via syntax tree (Priority: Code > Links > Images)
3. **Secondary context** - Check if on a checkbox line (runs alongside primary, enables multi-context support)

**Checkbox Detection:**
Two-step validation to prevent false positives:

1. **Syntax tree check** - Verify cursor is inside `Task` node
2. **Pattern matching** - If in task node, check line text for checkbox pattern

```typescript
// Step 1: Verify we're in a Task node via syntax tree
tree.iterate({
    from: pos,
    to: pos,
    enter: (node) => {
        if (node.name === 'Task') {
            isInTaskList = true;
            return false;
        }
    },
});

// Step 2: Only if in task list, match checkbox pattern
// Matches: "  - [ ] Task" or "    * [x] Done"
const checkboxMatch = lineText.match(/^(\s*[-*+]\s+)\[([x ])\]/);
```

Features:

- Supports list markers: `-`, `*`, `+`
- Supports indentation (nested task lists)
- Checkbox states: lowercase `x` (checked) or space (unchecked)
- Detects anywhere on the task line (not just on the checkbox)
- Prevents false positives by only checking `Task` nodes (not plain text in code blocks)

**Task Selection Detection:**

1. Iterates syntax tree once for entire selection range (O(N))
2. Validates `Task` nodes directly during traversal
3. Deduplicates tasks (handles multiple Task nodes per line)
4. Counts checked vs unchecked tasks
5. Returns `TaskSelectionContext` if tasks found

**Text Replacement:**
Uses two commands for atomic operations:

1. `contextUtils-replaceRange`: For single checkbox toggling
    - Accepts `expectedText` for **optimistic concurrency control**
    - Verifies content hasn't changed before replacing
2. `contextUtils-batchReplace`: For bulk operations
    - Accepts array of replacements with `expectedText`
    - **Atomic Transaction**: Applies all changes in a single CodeMirror transaction (one undo step)
    - Aborts entire batch if any line doesn't match expectation

### 4. Note vs Resource Distinction

Joplin uses the same `:/32-hex-id` syntax for both note links and resource (attachment) links. The content script cannot distinguish between them (it only sees text).

The main plugin (menus.ts) uses the `getJoplinIdType()` helper to check if an ID is a note or a resource. It uses `Promise.any` to check both endpoints concurrently:

```typescript
async function getJoplinIdType(id: string): Promise<'note' | 'resource' | null> {
    try {
        const { type } = await Promise.any([
            joplin.data.get(['notes', id], { fields: ['id'] }).then(() => ({ type: 'note' as const })),
            joplin.data.get(['resources', id], { fields: ['id'] }).then(() => ({ type: 'resource' as const })),
        ]);
        return type;
    } catch {
        // AggregateError: all promises rejected (ID doesn't exist as note or resource)
        return null;
    }
}
```

**Menu Behavior:**

- **Note links**: Show "Open Note" only (no Copy Path or Reveal File)
- **Resource links**: Show "Open Resource", "Copy Resource Path", "Reveal File in Folder"
- **Invalid IDs**: Treated as neither (no menu items shown)

This prevents errors when trying to get file paths for notes (which don't have physical files in the resources directory) and ensures robust handling of invalid IDs.

### 5. Footnote Detection

Footnotes in CodeMirror aren't parsed as distinct syntax nodes. To ensure robust detection:

1.  **Primary Check**: Syntax tree traversal (standard flow).
2.  **Fallback Check**: If no other context is found, the plugin scans the current line text for footnote references `[^label]`.
3.  **Definition Lookup**: Once a label is found, `findFootnoteDefinition` scans the document line-by-line to find the corresponding `[^label]:` definition. This is efficient enough for typical document sizes and avoids complex full-document parsing.

## Important Notes

### CodeMirror 6 Syntax Nodes

**Markdown:**

- `Link` - `[text](url)` or `[text][ref]` (entire structure with `URL` or `LinkLabel` child nodes)
- `LinkReference` - Reference definition `[ref]: url` (contains `LinkLabel` and `URL` children)
- `LinkLabel` - Label in reference links (e.g., `[ref]` in `[text][ref]` or `[ref]: url`)
- `Image` - `![alt](url)` (entire structure with `URL` child nodes)
- `URL` - Bare URLs or child nodes of Link/Image/LinkReference
- `Autolink` - `<url>`
- `InlineCode` - `` `code` `` (flat/leaf node, includes backticks)
- `FencedCode` - ` ` ```code blocks (may have`CodeText` child excluding fence markers)
- `CodeBlock` - Indented code blocks (4 spaces/tab, has multiple `CodeText` children, one per line)
- `CodeText` - Content of code blocks (single child for fenced, multiple children for indented)
- `Task` - Task list items with checkboxes (GFM extension, e.g., `- [ ] Task`)

**HTML in Markdown:**

- `HTMLTag` - Entire tag (no internal structure)
- Must use regex for `<img src="...">` parsing (acceptable here)

**Code Node Details:**

- `InlineCode` - Leaf node with backticks included (`` `code` ``)
- `FencedCode` - Single `CodeText` child (excludes fence markers)
- `CodeBlock` - Multiple `CodeText` children, one per line (includes trailing newlines)

### Settings Best Practices

- All settings default to `true`
- **Use `settingsCache` for synchronous access** (avoids async overhead)
- Cache is automatically updated via `joplin.settings.onChange`
- Settings changes apply immediately (no restart needed)

### Error Handling

- Commands wrap handlers in try/catch
- Show error toasts on failure
- Log errors to console
- Context menu filter catches errors to avoid breaking Joplin's menu

## Build Configuration

**plugin.config.json:**

```json
{
    "extraScripts": ["contentScripts/contentScript.ts"]
}
```

Content scripts must be declared here for webpack bundling.

## Testing Considerations

- Test with URLs containing special characters (nested parentheses, spaces, etc.)
- Verify settings changes apply without restart
- Check context detection at various cursor positions
- Test with both Joplin resources (attachments) and note links
    - Note links: Should only show "Open Note"
    - Resource links: Should show all resource options
- Test with external URLs and email addresses
- **Test reference-style links:**
    - `[text][ref]` with `[ref]: url` → detects link correctly
    - Case-insensitive matching: `[UPPER]`, `[upper]`, `[UpPeR]` all match `[upper]: url`
    - Multiple definitions with same label → uses first occurrence
- Test inline code and fenced code blocks (including nested backticks in fenced blocks)
- **Test checkbox toggling:**
    - Single checkbox: Cursor on `- [ ] Task` → shows "Check Task"
    - Single checkbox: Cursor on `- [x] Done` → shows "Uncheck Task"
    - Nested lists: `  - [ ] Nested` → detects correctly
    - Cursor position: Anywhere on task line → detects checkbox
- **Test bulk checkbox operations:**
    - Select multiple task lines → shows "Check All Tasks (N)" and/or "Uncheck All Tasks (N)"
    - Mixed selection with non-task lines → only processes tasks
    - All checked selection → only shows "Uncheck All"
    - All unchecked selection → only shows "Check All"
    - Mixed checked/unchecked → shows both options with counts
    - Toast feedback shows count of tasks processed
- **Test multi-context support:**
    - `- [ ] \`code\`` with cursor in code → shows both "Copy Code" AND "Check Task"
    - `- [ ] [link](url)` with cursor in link → shows both link options AND "Check Task"
    - Code block outside task list → shows only "Copy Code" (no checkbox)
- **Test false positive prevention:**
    - Code block containing `- [ ] Task` text → NO checkbox menu (only "Copy Code")
    - Selection including code block with task-like text → doesn't count as tasks
- **Test footnotes:**
    - Cursor on `[^1]` → shows "Go to footnote"
    - Clicking "Go to footnote" → scrolls to `[^1]: definition`
    - Missing definition → command should handle gracefully (or not appear if we pre-validate)
    - Multiple footnotes on same line → detects correct one based on cursor position

Commit message:

fix: don't match footnote defs in code blocks

context-utils-documentation.md, after:

# Context Utils Plugin - Architecture Documentation

> Internal documentation for LLM reference. Describes plugin architecture, file structure, and key patterns.

## Overview

Joplin plugin that adds context-aware menu options when right-clicking on links, images, and code in the markdown editor. Uses CodeMirror 6 syntax tree for robust detection.

**Supported Contexts:**

- External URLs (`https://...`)
- Joplin resources (`:/32-hex-id`)
- Email addresses (`mailto:...`)
- Markdown links (`[text](url)`)
- Reference-style links (`[text][ref]` with `[ref]: url`)
- Markdown images (`![alt](url)`)
- HTML images (`<img src="...">`)
- Inline code (`` `code` ``)
- Code blocks (` ` ```)
- **Task list checkboxes** (`- [ ]` / `- [x]`)
- **Task selections** (multiple selected checkboxes)
- **Footnotes** (`[^1]` reference)

## Architecture

### Core Components

```
┌─────────────────┐
│   index.ts      │  Plugin entry point
│                 │  - Registers settings
│                 │  - Registers content script
│                 │  - Registers commands
│                 │  - Registers context menu filter
└────────┬────────┘
         │
    ┌────┴────┬──────────┬──────────┬──────────┐
    │         │          │          │          │
    v         v          v          v          v
┌────────┐ ┌───────┐ ┌────────┐ ┌─────────┐ ┌──────────┐
│settings│ │menus  │ │commands│ │  types  │ │ content  │
│  .ts   │ │  .ts  │ │  .ts   │ │   .ts   │ │ scripts/ │
└────────┘ └───────┘ └────────┘ └─────────┘ └──────────┘
```

### Data Flow ("Pull" Architecture)

1. **Content Script** (contentScript.ts):
    - Registers command `contextUtils-getContextAtCursor` using `codeMirrorWrapper.registerCommand()`
    - Command executes on-demand when called by main plugin
    - Delegates detection to `contextDetection.ts`
    - Returns **array of contexts** (supports multiple simultaneous contexts)

2. **Main Plugin** (menus.ts):
    - When context menu opens, calls `joplin.commands.execute('editor.execCommand', { name: 'contextUtils-getContextAtCursor' })`
    - Awaits contexts directly from editor (guaranteed to match cursor position)
    - Iterates through returned contexts array
    - Builds context menu dynamically with items for all detected contexts

3. **Commands** (commands.ts):
    - Execute actions when menu items are clicked
    - Use Joplin API for clipboard, file operations, URL opening

**Key Benefits of Pull Architecture:**

- ✅ Zero race conditions (context always matches cursor position)
- ✅ Zero overhead (detection only runs on right-click, not every cursor movement)
- ✅ Simpler code (no message passing, no global state)
- ✅ Multi-context support (can show multiple relevant options simultaneously)

## File Structure

### Core Files

**src/index.ts**

- Plugin registration and initialization
- Coordinates all subsystems
- Initialization order matters (settings → settings cache → content script → commands → menu)

**src/types.ts**

- Type definitions with discriminated unions
- `EditorContext = LinkContext | CodeContext | CheckboxContext | TaskSelectionContext | FootnoteContext`
- `LinkType` enum (ExternalUrl, JoplinResource, Email)
- `TaskInfo` interface for individual tasks in selections
- Command IDs (including checkbox and footnote commands)
- `EditorRange` for text replacement operations

**src/settings.ts**

- Settings registration using Joplin Settings API
- Centralized `SETTINGS_CONFIG` object defines all settings with metadata (key, defaultValue, label, description)
- 10 boolean settings (all default `true`):
    - `showToastMessages` - Show toast notifications
    - `showOpenLink` - Show "Open Link" in context menu
    - `showCopyPath` - Show "Copy Path" in context menu
    - `showRevealFile` - Show "Reveal File" in context menu
    - `showCopyCode` - Show "Copy Code" in context menu
    - `showCopyOcrText` - Show "Copy OCR Text" in context menu
    - `showToggleTask` - Show task toggle options in context menu
    - `showGoToFootnote` - Show "Go to footnote" in context menu
    - `showPinToTabs` - Show "Open Note as Pinned Tab" in context menu (requires Note Tabs plugin)
    - `showOpenNoteNewWindow` - Show "Open Note in New Window" in context menu
- Settings accessed via `settingsCache` object (e.g., `settingsCache.showToastMessages`)

**src/menus.ts**

- Context menu filter (`joplin.workspace.filterEditorContextMenu`)
- Pulls contexts on-demand from content script via `editor.execCommand` (returns array)
- Supports multiple contexts at same position (e.g., code + checkbox)
- Distinguishes between note links and resource links using `isJoplinNote()` helper
- Resource-specific options (Copy Path, Reveal File) only shown for actual resources
- Checks settings before adding menu items
- Only adds separator if ≥1 menu item will be shown

**src/commands.ts**

- Command handlers for:
    - Open Link (external URLs → browser, resources → default app)
    - Copy Path (URLs → clipboard, resources → file path)
    - Reveal File (resources only → file explorer)
    - Copy Code (code blocks → clipboard)
    - Copy OCR Text (image resources → clipboard)
    - **Toggle Checkbox** (single checkbox `[ ]` ↔ `[x]`)
    - **Check All Tasks** (bulk check unchecked tasks in selection)
    - **Uncheck All Tasks** (bulk uncheck checked tasks in selection)
    - **Go to Footnote** (scrolls to footnote definition)
    - **Open Note as Pinned Tab** (opens note as pinned tab via Note Tabs plugin)
    - **Open Note in New Window** (opens note in a new Joplin window)
- All commands show toast notifications (if enabled)

**src/contentScripts/contentScript.ts**

- CodeMirror 6 content script entry point (type: CodeMirrorPlugin)
- Registers commands:
    - `contextUtils-getContextAtCursor` - delegates to `contextDetection.ts`
    - `contextUtils-replaceRange` - text replacement for checkbox toggling
    - `contextUtils-batchReplace` - atomic batch replacement for bulk operations
    - `contextUtils-scrollToPosition` - scrolls editor to specific position (for footnotes)

**src/contentScripts/contextDetection.ts**

- Multi-context detection logic (returns array of contexts)
- Delegates parsing to `parsingUtils.ts`
- Detection priority: Code > Links > Images > Footnotes (checkboxes run alongside as secondary context)
- Uses text scanning for footnotes (syntax tree doesn't detect them)

**src/contentScripts/parsingUtils.ts**

- Pure utility functions for parsing:
    - `extractUrl` (syntax tree traversal)
    - `extractReferenceLabel` (syntax tree traversal for reference links)
    - `findReferenceDefinition` (finds URL for reference label, case-insensitive, first occurrence wins)
    - `parseImageTag` (regex)
    - `classifyUrl` (regex)
    - `parseInlineCode` (regex)
    - `parseCodeBlock` (syntax tree + regex fallback)
    - `findFootnoteDefinition` (RegExpCursor with code block filtering)

### Utilities

**src/logger.ts**

- Centralized logging with log levels (DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR)
- Exposes runtime controls via `console.contextUtils.setLogLevel()`
- Default level: WARN

**src/utils/toastUtils.ts**

- Toast notification wrapper
- Checks `settingsCache.showToastMessages` before showing
- Graceful error handling

## Key Patterns

### 1. Discriminated Unions

```typescript
type EditorContext = LinkContext | CodeContext | CheckboxContext | TaskSelectionContext | FootnoteContext;

interface LinkContext {
    contextType: 'link'; // Discriminator
    url: string;
    type: LinkType;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface CodeContext {
    contextType: 'code'; // Discriminator
    code: string;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface CheckboxContext {
    contextType: 'checkbox'; // Discriminator
    checked: boolean;
    lineText: string;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface TaskSelectionContext {
    contextType: 'taskSelection'; // Discriminator
    tasks: TaskInfo[];
    checkedCount: number;
    uncheckedCount: number;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}

interface FootnoteContext {
    contextType: 'footnote'; // Discriminator
    label: string;
    targetPos: number;
    from: number;
    to: number;
}
```

TypeScript uses `contextType` to narrow types safely.

### 2. Hybrid Detection Approach

The plugin uses **syntax tree traversal for links** (robust) and a **hybrid approach for code** (practical).

**For Links - Syntax Tree (Robust):**

Bad (regex, fragile):

```typescript
const match = linkText.match(/\[([^\]]+)\]\(([^)]+)\)/);
// Breaks on nested parentheses: [text](https://example.com/foo(bar))
```

Good (syntax tree, robust):

```typescript
function extractUrlFromLinkNode(node: SyntaxNode, view: EditorView): string | null {
    const cursor = node.cursor();
    if (!cursor.firstChild()) return null;

    do {
        if (cursor.name === 'URL') {
            return view.state.doc.sliceString(cursor.from, cursor.to);
        }
    } while (cursor.nextSibling());

    return null;
}
```

**For Code - Hybrid Approach:**

- **Inline code**: Regex (because `InlineCode` nodes include backticks)
- **Fenced code blocks**: Syntax tree to extract `CodeText` children, with regex fallback
- **Indented code blocks**: Syntax tree to collect multiple `CodeText` children (one per line)

### 3. Checkbox Detection and Toggling

**Detection Strategy:**

1. **Selection check** - If there's a text selection, check for tasks first (returns single `TaskSelectionContext`)
2. **Primary context** - Detect code/links/images via syntax tree (Priority: Code > Links > Images)
3. **Secondary context** - Check if on a checkbox line (runs alongside primary, enables multi-context support)

**Checkbox Detection:**
Two-step validation to prevent false positives:

1. **Syntax tree check** - Verify cursor is inside `Task` node
2. **Pattern matching** - If in task node, check line text for checkbox pattern

```typescript
// Step 1: Verify we're in a Task node via syntax tree
tree.iterate({
    from: pos,
    to: pos,
    enter: (node) => {
        if (node.name === 'Task') {
            isInTaskList = true;
            return false;
        }
    },
});

// Step 2: Only if in task list, match checkbox pattern
// Matches: "  - [ ] Task" or "    * [x] Done"
const checkboxMatch = lineText.match(/^(\s*[-*+]\s+)\[([x ])\]/);
```

Features:

- Supports list markers: `-`, `*`, `+`
- Supports indentation (nested task lists)
- Checkbox states: lowercase `x` (checked) or space (unchecked)
- Detects anywhere on the task line (not just on the checkbox)
- Prevents false positives by only checking `Task` nodes (not plain text in code blocks)

**Task Selection Detection:**

1. Iterates syntax tree once for entire selection range (O(N))
2. Validates `Task` nodes directly during traversal
3. Deduplicates tasks (handles multiple Task nodes per line)
4. Counts checked vs unchecked tasks
5. Returns `TaskSelectionContext` if tasks found

**Text Replacement:**
Uses two commands for atomic operations:

1. `contextUtils-replaceRange`: For single checkbox toggling
    - Accepts `expectedText` for **optimistic concurrency control**
    - Verifies content hasn't changed before replacing
2. `contextUtils-batchReplace`: For bulk operations
    - Accepts array of replacements with `expectedText`
    - **Atomic Transaction**: Applies all changes in a single CodeMirror transaction (one undo step)
    - Aborts entire batch if any line doesn't match expectation

### 4. Note vs Resource Distinction

Joplin uses the same `:/32-hex-id` syntax for both note links and resource (attachment) links. The content script cannot distinguish between them (it only sees text).

The main plugin (menus.ts) uses the `getJoplinIdType()` helper to check if an ID is a note or a resource. It uses `Promise.any` to check both endpoints concurrently:

```typescript
async function getJoplinIdType(id: string): Promise<'note' | 'resource' | null> {
    try {
        const { type } = await Promise.any([
            joplin.data.get(['notes', id], { fields: ['id'] }).then(() => ({ type: 'note' as const })),
            joplin.data.get(['resources', id], { fields: ['id'] }).then(() => ({ type: 'resource' as const })),
        ]);
        return type;
    } catch {
        // AggregateError: all promises rejected (ID doesn't exist as note or resource)
        return null;
    }
}
```

**Menu Behavior:**

- **Note links**: Show "Open Note" only (no Copy Path or Reveal File)
- **Resource links**: Show "Open Resource", "Copy Resource Path", "Reveal File in Folder"
- **Invalid IDs**: Treated as neither (no menu items shown)

This prevents errors when trying to get file paths for notes (which don't have physical files in the resources directory) and ensures robust handling of invalid IDs.

### 5. Footnote Detection

Footnotes in CodeMirror aren't parsed as distinct syntax nodes. To ensure robust detection:

1.  **Primary Check**: Syntax tree traversal (standard flow).
2.  **Fallback Check**: If no other context is found, the plugin scans the current line text for footnote references `[^label]`.
3.  **Definition Lookup**: Once a label is found, `findFootnoteDefinition` scans the document using codemirror's RegExpCursor to find the corresponding `[^label]:` definition.

## Important Notes

### CodeMirror 6 Syntax Nodes

**Markdown:**

- `Link` - `[text](url)` or `[text][ref]` (entire structure with `URL` or `LinkLabel` child nodes)
- `LinkReference` - Reference definition `[ref]: url` (contains `LinkLabel` and `URL` children)
- `LinkLabel` - Label in reference links (e.g., `[ref]` in `[text][ref]` or `[ref]: url`)
- `Image` - `![alt](url)` (entire structure with `URL` child nodes)
- `URL` - Bare URLs or child nodes of Link/Image/LinkReference
- `Autolink` - `<url>`
- `InlineCode` - `` `code` `` (flat/leaf node, includes backticks)
- `FencedCode` - ` ` ```code blocks (may have`CodeText` child excluding fence markers)
- `CodeBlock` - Indented code blocks (4 spaces/tab, has multiple `CodeText` children, one per line)
- `CodeText` - Content of code blocks (single child for fenced, multiple children for indented)
- `Task` - Task list items with checkboxes (GFM extension, e.g., `- [ ] Task`)

**HTML in Markdown:**

- `HTMLTag` - Entire tag (no internal structure)
- Must use regex for `<img src="...">` parsing (acceptable here)

**Code Node Details:**

- `InlineCode` - Leaf node with backticks included (`` `code` ``)
- `FencedCode` - Single `CodeText` child (excludes fence markers)
- `CodeBlock` - Multiple `CodeText` children, one per line (includes trailing newlines)

### Settings Best Practices

- All settings default to `true`
- **Use `settingsCache` for synchronous access** (avoids async overhead)
- Cache is automatically updated via `joplin.settings.onChange`
- Settings changes apply immediately (no restart needed)

### Error Handling

- Commands wrap handlers in try/catch
- Show error toasts on failure
- Log errors to console
- Context menu filter catches errors to avoid breaking Joplin's menu

## Build Configuration

**plugin.config.json:**

```json
{
    "extraScripts": ["contentScripts/contentScript.ts"]
}
```

Content scripts must be declared here for webpack bundling.

## Testing Considerations

- Test with URLs containing special characters (nested parentheses, spaces, etc.)
- Verify settings changes apply without restart
- Check context detection at various cursor positions
- Test with both Joplin resources (attachments) and note links
    - Note links: Should only show "Open Note"
    - Resource links: Should show all resource options
- Test with external URLs and email addresses
- **Test reference-style links:**
    - `[text][ref]` with `[ref]: url` → detects link correctly
    - Case-insensitive matching: `[UPPER]`, `[upper]`, `[UpPeR]` all match `[upper]: url`
    - Multiple definitions with same label → uses first occurrence
- Test inline code and fenced code blocks (including nested backticks in fenced blocks)
- **Test checkbox toggling:**
    - Single checkbox: Cursor on `- [ ] Task` → shows "Check Task"
    - Single checkbox: Cursor on `- [x] Done` → shows "Uncheck Task"
    - Nested lists: `  - [ ] Nested` → detects correctly
    - Cursor position: Anywhere on task line → detects checkbox
- **Test bulk checkbox operations:**
    - Select multiple task lines → shows "Check All Tasks (N)" and/or "Uncheck All Tasks (N)"
    - Mixed selection with non-task lines → only processes tasks
    - All checked selection → only shows "Uncheck All"
    - All unchecked selection → only shows "Check All"
    - Mixed checked/unchecked → shows both options with counts
    - Toast feedback shows count of tasks processed
- **Test multi-context support:**
    - `- [ ] \`code\`` with cursor in code → shows both "Copy Code" AND "Check Task"
    - `- [ ] [link](url)` with cursor in link → shows both link options AND "Check Task"
    - Code block outside task list → shows only "Copy Code" (no checkbox)
- **Test false positive prevention:**
    - Code block containing `- [ ] Task` text → NO checkbox menu (only "Copy Code")
    - Selection including code block with task-like text → doesn't count as tasks
- **Test footnotes:**
    - Cursor on `[^1]` → shows "Go to footnote"
    - Clicking "Go to footnote" → scrolls to `[^1]: definition`
    - Missing definition → command should handle gracefully (or not appear if we pre-validate)
    - Multiple footnotes on same line → detects correct one based on cursor position
